{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\uc1\deff1\stshfdbch0\stshfloch0\stshfhich0\stshfbi0\deflang2057\deflangfe2057{\fonttbl{\f0\froman\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 02020603050405020304}Times New Roman;}{\f1\fswiss\fcharset0\fprq2{\*\panose 020b0604020202020204}Arial;}
{\f2\fmodern\fcharset0\fprq1{\*\panose 02070309020205020404}Courier New;}{\f3\froman\fcharset2\fprq2{\*\panose 05050102010706020507}Symbol;}{\f37\froman\fcharset238\fprq2 Times New Roman CE;}{\f38\froman\fcharset204\fprq2 Times New Roman Cyr;}
{\f40\froman\fcharset161\fprq2 Times New Roman Greek;}{\f41\froman\fcharset162\fprq2 Times New Roman Tur;}{\f42\froman\fcharset177\fprq2 Times New Roman (Hebrew);}{\f43\froman\fcharset178\fprq2 Times New Roman (Arabic);}
{\f44\froman\fcharset186\fprq2 Times New Roman Baltic;}{\f45\froman\fcharset163\fprq2 Times New Roman (Vietnamese);}{\f47\fswiss\fcharset238\fprq2 Arial CE;}{\f48\fswiss\fcharset204\fprq2 Arial Cyr;}{\f50\fswiss\fcharset161\fprq2 Arial Greek;}
{\f51\fswiss\fcharset162\fprq2 Arial Tur;}{\f52\fswiss\fcharset177\fprq2 Arial (Hebrew);}{\f53\fswiss\fcharset178\fprq2 Arial (Arabic);}{\f54\fswiss\fcharset186\fprq2 Arial Baltic;}{\f55\fswiss\fcharset163\fprq2 Arial (Vietnamese);}
{\f57\fmodern\fcharset238\fprq1 Courier New CE;}{\f58\fmodern\fcharset204\fprq1 Courier New Cyr;}{\f60\fmodern\fcharset161\fprq1 Courier New Greek;}{\f61\fmodern\fcharset162\fprq1 Courier New Tur;}{\f62\fmodern\fcharset177\fprq1 Courier New (Hebrew);}
{\f63\fmodern\fcharset178\fprq1 Courier New (Arabic);}{\f64\fmodern\fcharset186\fprq1 Courier New Baltic;}{\f65\fmodern\fcharset163\fprq1 Courier New (Vietnamese);}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue255;
\red0\green255\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;\red0\green0\blue128;\red0\green128\blue128;\red0\green128\blue0;\red128\green0\blue128;\red128\green0\blue0;\red128\green128\blue0;
\red128\green128\blue128;\red192\green192\blue192;}{\stylesheet{\ql \li0\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 \snext0 Normal;}{\s1\ql \li0\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\outlinelevel0\rin0\lin0\itap0 
\f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 \sbasedon0 \snext0 heading 1;}{\s2\ql \li0\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\outlinelevel1\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 \sbasedon0 \snext0 heading 2;}{
\s3\ql \li0\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\outlinelevel2\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 \sbasedon0 \snext0 heading 3;}{\*\cs10 \additive \ssemihidden Default Paragraph Font;}{\*
\ts11\tsrowd\trftsWidthB3\trpaddl108\trpaddr108\trpaddfl3\trpaddft3\trpaddfb3\trpaddfr3\trcbpat1\trcfpat1\tscellwidthfts0\tsvertalt\tsbrdrt\tsbrdrl\tsbrdrb\tsbrdrr\tsbrdrdgl\tsbrdrdgr\tsbrdrh\tsbrdrv 
\ql \li0\ri0\widctlpar\aspalpha\aspnum\faauto\adjustright\rin0\lin0\itap0 \fs20\lang1024\langfe1024\cgrid\langnp1024\langfenp1024 \snext11 \ssemihidden Normal Table;}{\*\cs15 \additive \ul\cf2 \sbasedon10 \styrsid5919392 Hyperlink;}}
{\*\latentstyles\lsdstimax156\lsdlockeddef0}{\*\rsidtbl \rsid5919392}{\*\generator Microsoft Word 11.0.6568;}{\info{\author Tony Hoyle}{\operator Tony Hoyle}{\creatim\yr2006\mo7\dy5\hr15}{\revtim\yr2006\mo7\dy5\hr15\min8}{\version2}{\edmins8}{\nofpages7}
{\nofwords2091}{\nofchars11925}{\*\company March Hare Software Ltd}{\nofcharsws13989}{\vern24579}}\widowctrl\ftnbj\aenddoc\noxlattoyen\expshrtn\noultrlspc\dntblnsbdb\nospaceforul\hyphcaps0\horzdoc\dghspace120\dgvspace120\dghorigin1701\dgvorigin1984
\dghshow0\dgvshow3\jcompress\viewkind4\viewscale100\nolnhtadjtbl\rsidroot5919392 \fet0\sectd \linex0\sectdefaultcl\sftnbj {\*\pnseclvl1\pnucrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl2\pnucltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}
{\*\pnseclvl3\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta .}}{\*\pnseclvl4\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl5\pndec\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl6\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}
{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl7\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl8\pnlcltr\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}{\*\pnseclvl9\pnlcrm\pnstart1\pnindent720\pnhang {\pntxtb (}{\pntxta )}}\pard\plain 
\s1\qc \li0\ri0\sb240\sa60\keepn\nowidctlpar\faauto\outlinelevel0\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\b\fs32\kerning32\insrsid5919392 CVSNT Release Notes
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\f0\insrsid5919392 
\par For opensource support please contact the cvsnt mailing list:
\par http://www.cvsnt.org/cgi-bin/mailman/listinfo/cvsnt
\par 
\par Commercial support and training is available from March Hare Software:
\par }{\field{\*\fldinst {\f2\fs20\insrsid5919392  HYPERLINK "http://www.march-hare.com/cvspro" }{\f2\fs20\insrsid5919392\charrsid13398650 {\*\datafield 
00d0c9ea79f9bace118c8200aa004ba90b02000000170000002100000068007400740070003a002f002f007700770077002e006d0061007200630068002d0068006100720065002e0063006f006d002f00630076007300700072006f000000e0c9ea79f9bace118c8200aa004ba90b4200000068007400740070003a002f00
2f007700770077002e006d0061007200630068002d0068006100720065002e0063006f006d002f00630076007300700072006f000000}}}{\fldrslt {\cs15\f2\fs20\ul\cf2\insrsid5919392\charrsid13398650 http://www.march-hare.com/cvspro}}}{\f2\fs20\insrsid5919392 
\par }\pard\plain \s3\ql \li0\ri0\sb240\sa60\nowidctlpar\faauto\outlinelevel2\rin0\lin0\itap0\pararsid5919392 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\b\fs26\insrsid5919392 Important changes between stable release 2.5.03.2260
 and 2.5.03.2382\line 
\par }\pard\plain \ql \fi-360\li720\ri0\nowidctlpar\tx720\faauto\rin0\lin720\itap0\pararsid5919392 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\f3\insrsid5919392 \'b7\tab }{\f0\insrsid5919392 
Control panel modified to work on vista beta builds (note: no support is available for running on beta operating systems).
\par }{\f3\insrsid5919392 \'b7\tab }{\f0\insrsid5919392 import ignores hidden files by default.  New \endash h option added to include them.
\par }{\f3\insrsid5919392 \'b7\tab }{\f0\insrsid5919392 Library updates: zlib 1.2.3, expat 2.0.0,  pcre 6.6.
\par }{\f3\insrsid5919392 \'b7\tab }{\f0\insrsid5919392 Remote init commands now work within a defined directory on the server only.
\par }\pard\plain \s3\ql \li0\ri0\sb240\sa60\nowidctlpar\faauto\outlinelevel2\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\b\fs26\insrsid5919392 Important changes between stable release 2.5.03.2151 and 2.5.03.2260\line 
\par }\pard\plain \ql \fi-360\li720\ri0\nowidctlpar\tx720\faauto\rin0\lin720\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\f3\insrsid5919392 \'b7\tab }{\f0\insrsid5919392 
cvsagent can store and retrieve its passwords from a U3 enabled dongle if one is available.  Also, a u3p package of cvsagent is available.
\par }{\f3\insrsid5919392 \'b7\tab }{\f0\insrsid5919392 On 64bit windows platforms a 64bit setuid library is installed for pserver impersonation on 64bit platforms.
\par }{\f3\insrsid5919392 \'b7\tab }{\f0\insrsid5919392 (Unix) it is possible to enable visiblity support when compiling (requires gcc 4).
\par }{\f3\insrsid5919392 \'b7\tab }{\f0\insrsid5919392 db2 is now a supported database for audit.
\par }{\f3\insrsid5919392 \'b7\tab }{\f0\insrsid5919392 Client now supports socks4 and socks5 proxies.
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\f2\fs20\insrsid5919392 
\par }\pard\plain \s3\ql \li0\ri0\sb240\sa60\nowidctlpar\faauto\outlinelevel2\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\b\fs26\insrsid5919392 Important changes between stable release 2.5.02.2064 and 2.5.03.2151
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\f0\insrsid5919392 
\par }\pard \ql \fi-360\li720\ri0\nowidctlpar\tx720\faauto\rin0\lin720\itap0 {\f3\insrsid5919392 \'b7\tab }{\f0\insrsid5919392 
Howl is no longer used by default for Zeroconf publication.  The Multicast DNS responder can be selected in the control panel (Win32) or in the cvsnt configuratoin file.  Currently supported: Internal 'mini' mdns (default), Howl, Apple.
\par }{\f3\insrsid5919392 \'b7\tab }{\f0\insrsid5919392 Zeroconf should work on all platforms.
\par }{\f3\insrsid5919392 \'b7\tab }{\f0\insrsid5919392 Lockserver will no longer allow a writelock if a transaction is currently active, even if all locks are released on a file.  Removes a small window of error where two peo
ple could request the same version.
\par }{\f3\insrsid5919392 \'b7\tab }{\f0\insrsid5919392 cvsnt control panel is now loaded through a proxy stub.
\par }{\f3\insrsid5919392 \'b7\tab }{\f0\insrsid5919392 When talking to server versions <2.0.58, cvsnt will no longer advertise it supports Kerberos.  A bug in those versions makes the server disable protocol negotiation if kerberos is found.
\par }{\f3\insrsid5919392 \'b7\tab }{\f0\insrsid5919392 Unix builds will run as UTF8 if possible.  The Win32 UTF8 server is no longer experimental.  Win32 client now has a --utf8 switch, which also forces the client into UTF8 mode.
\par }{\f3\insrsid5919392 \'b7\tab }{\f0\insrsid5919392 As a result of the above, multilingual filenames (inc. japanese, hebrew) should now behave correctly.
\par }{\f3\insrsid5919392 \'b7\tab }{\f0\insrsid5919392 Using a root string starting \lquote ::\rquote  makes an anonymous connection to a server, provided the server is a supported cvsnt server with anonymous connections enabled. eg. cvs \endash 
d ::cvs.cvsnt.org ls
\par }{\f3\insrsid5919392 \'b7\tab }{\f0\insrsid5919392 \lquote cvs ls\rquote  now works against non-cvsnt servers by emulating the behaviour of the ls command on the client side.
\par }{\f3\insrsid5919392 \'b7\tab }{\f0\insrsid5919392 Individual repositories may be taken offline using the control panel (on Windows) or by modifying the configuration file (on Unix).
\par 
\par }\pard\plain \s3\ql \li0\ri0\sb240\sa60\nowidctlpar\faauto\outlinelevel2\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\b\fs26\insrsid5919392 Important changes between stable release 2.5.01.1976 and 2.5.02.2064}{
\f0\insrsid5919392 
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\f0\insrsid5919392 
\par }\pard \ql \fi-360\li720\ri0\nowidctlpar\tx720\faauto\rin0\lin720\itap0 {\f3\insrsid5919392 \'b7\tab }{\f0\insrsid5919392 cvs init will now attempt to register with the local server, and will warn you if that is not possible.
\par }{\f3\insrsid5919392 \'b7\tab }{\f0\insrsid5919392 Remote init is possible, but only if enabled by the system administrator.
\par }{\f3\insrsid5919392 \'b7\tab }{\f0\insrsid5919392 cvsnt servers now have a remote discovery protocol, which can be used to advertise repositories and also define the 'anonymous' username.
\par }{\f3\insrsid5919392 \'b7\tab }{\f0\insrsid5919392 cvsnt clients can discover servers on the local network using multicast dns (zeroconf).
\par }{\f3\insrsid5919392 \'b7\tab }{\f0\insrsid5919392 Email generation trigger can generate commit/tag/notify emails, with limited customisation available.
\par }{\f3\insrsid5919392 \'b7\tab }{\f0\insrsid5919392 Server operations can be logged using the audit trigger.  Interfaces to several SQL backends are available.
\par }{\f3\insrsid5919392 \'b7\tab }{\f0\insrsid5919392 Control panel now allows selection of all protocols/triggers installed on the server, with individual configuration for each.
\par }{\f3\insrsid5919392 \'b7\tab }{\f0\insrsid5919392 If encryption is set to 'force encryption', protocols which cannot support encryption are automatically disabled.
\par }{\f3\insrsid5919392 \'b7\tab }{\f0\insrsid5919392 Triggers no longer have to be listed in CVSROOT/triggers if they are a library with the name *_trigger
\par }{\f3\insrsid5919392 \'b7\tab }{\f0\insrsid5919392 Extnt has been extended and now has more options for integration with frontends that support it.
\par }{\f3\insrsid5919392 \'b7\tab }{\f0\insrsid5919392 New RCS keyword $Branch$ set to branch name of a revision.
\par }{\f3\insrsid5919392 \'b7\tab }{\f0\insrsid5919392 Client side sserver certificates, with the option to require these.
\par }{\f3\insrsid5919392 \'b7\tab }{\f0\insrsid5919392 Support for Schannel over SSPI.
\par }{\f3\insrsid5919392 \'b7\tab }{\f0\insrsid5919392 The Redhat RPM builds are now split into multiple RPM files to minimise dependencies.
\par }{\f3\insrsid5919392 \'b7\tab }{\f0\insrsid5919392 Support for -I@ in import, to ignore client-side cvswrappers when importing.
\par }\pard\plain \s3\ql \li0\ri0\sb240\sa60\nowidctlpar\faauto\outlinelevel2\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\b\fs26\insrsid5919392 Important changes between stable release 2.5.01.1969 and 2.5.01.1976
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\f0\insrsid5919392 
\par }\pard \ql \fi-360\li720\ri0\nowidctlpar\tx720\faauto\rin0\lin720\itap0 {\f3\insrsid5919392 \'b7\tab }{\f0\insrsid5919392 Support for multiple bugid (-b) options in edit and commit.
\par }{\f3\insrsid5919392 \'b7\tab }{\f0\insrsid5919392 Fix problem with reserved checkouts becoming read/write in build 1969.
\par }\pard\plain \s3\ql \li0\ri0\sb240\sa60\nowidctlpar\faauto\outlinelevel2\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\b\fs26\insrsid5919392 Important changes between stable release 2.5.01.1910 and 2.5.01.1969
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\f0\insrsid5919392 
\par }\pard \ql \fi-360\li720\ri0\nowidctlpar\tx720\faauto\rin0\lin720\itap0 {\f3\insrsid5919392 \'b7\tab }{\f0\insrsid5919392 (Win32) Warning at end of MSI install fixed.
\par }{\f3\insrsid5919392 \'b7\tab }{\f0\insrsid5919392 Add support for default-deny ACLs (AclMode, in CVSROOT/config)
\par }{\f3\insrsid5919392 \'b7\tab }{\f0\insrsid5919392 Add -r option for adding a file to a different branch than the current default
\par }{\f3\insrsid5919392 \'b7\tab }{\f0\insrsid5919392 Add -b to mark a file with a bug identifier as it is added
\par }{\f3\insrsid5919392 \'b7\tab }{\f0\insrsid5919392 Edit -C to check if a file is unmodified before allowing edit
\par }{\f3\insrsid5919392 \'b7\tab }{\f0\insrsid5919392 PCRE (Perl Compatible Regular Expressions) now used internally.  This affects the commit support files.  If you have any complex regular expressions you will need to verify they still behave as expected.

\par }{\f3\insrsid5919392 \'b7\tab }{\f0\insrsid5919392 Default to running only first match in commit support files (2.0.58 behaviour).  
\par }{\f3\insrsid5919392 \'b7\tab }{\f0\insrsid5919392 Matching lines in commit support files prefixed with '+' will be run in addition to the first match found.
\par }{\f3\insrsid5919392 \'b7\tab }{\f0\insrsid5919392 Support for putty sessions in plink.
\par }{\f3\insrsid5919392 \'b7\tab }{\f0\insrsid5919392 Fix for plink hanging with certain servers.
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\f0\insrsid5919392 
\par }\pard\plain \s3\ql \li0\ri0\sb240\sa60\nowidctlpar\faauto\outlinelevel2\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\b\fs26\insrsid5919392 Important changes between stable release 2.0.58d and 2.5.01.1910
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\nowidctlpar\tx720\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\insrsid5919392 
\par }\pard \ql \fi-360\li720\ri0\nowidctlpar\tx720\faauto\rin0\lin720\itap0 {\f3\insrsid5919392 \'b7\tab }{\f0\insrsid5919392 
(Win32) MSI installer.  It may be necessary to do uninstall the old version before installing this version.  The old innosetup installer is still being maintained and is available at http://web.telia.com/~u86216177/cvsntinstaller.html
\par }\pard \ql \fi-360\li720\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin720\itap0 {\f3\insrsid5919392 \'b7\tab }{\f0\insrsid5919392 
(Win32) Optional support for case sensitive servers.  A device driver is required for this which is available for CVSNT commercial support customers and to other by arrangement with March-Hare Software.
\par }{\f3\insrsid5919392 \'b7\tab }{\f0\insrsid5919392 (Win32) Server is now a Unicode application.
\par }{\f3\insrsid5919392 \'b7\tab }{\f0\insrsid5919392 (Win32) Experimental UTF8 server mode.  This allows the greatest compatibility for multilingual projects.
\par }\pard \ql \fi-360\li720\ri0\nowidctlpar\tx720\faauto\rin0\lin720\itap0 {\f3\insrsid5919392 \'b7\tab }{\f0\insrsid5919392 (OSX) Resource fork support.
\par }\pard \ql \fi-360\li720\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin720\itap0 {\f3\insrsid5919392 \'b7\tab }{\f0\insrsid5919392 (OSX) Installer now installs server and lockserver correctly.
\par }{\f3\insrsid5919392 \'b7\tab }{\f0\insrsid5919392 (OSX) OSX is now a primary supported platform.
\par }{\f3\insrsid5919392 \'b7\tab }{\f0\insrsid5919392 (Unix) PAM configuration file is now cvsnt not cvs (on most systems rename /etc/pam.d/cvs to /etc/pam.d/cvsnt)
\par }{\f3\insrsid5919392 \'b7\tab }{\f0\insrsid5919392 Client now handles filename character set conversion by default when talking to CVSNT servers.
\par }\pard \ql \fi-360\li720\ri0\nowidctlpar\tx720\faauto\rin0\lin720\itap0 {\f3\insrsid5919392 \'b7\tab }{\f0\insrsid5919392 Threaded lockserver for better scalability.
\par }\pard \ql \fi-360\li720\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin720\itap0 {\f3\insrsid5919392 \'b7\tab }{\f0\insrsid5919392 Advertisement by Rendezvous/Zeroconf when supported by the OS.
\par }\pard \ql \fi-360\li720\ri0\nowidctlpar\tx720\faauto\rin0\lin720\itap0 {\f3\insrsid5919392 \'b7\tab }{\f0\insrsid5919392 Server plugin API.  Applications can now tightly integrate with the server execution.
\par }{\f3\insrsid5919392 \'b7\tab }{\f0\insrsid5919392 Commit helper scripts now handled as a plugin.  The syntax has also been extended.  As a side effect pathnames must now use Unix-style forward slashes \lquote /\rquote  not backslashes \endash 
 some changes to existing installations may be required on Win32 systems.  In particular library and COM references are only supported in the triggers files.
\par }\pard \ql \fi-360\li720\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin720\itap0 {\f3\insrsid5919392 \'b7\tab }{\f0\insrsid5919392 ACL options \lquote all\rquote  and \lquote none\rquote .
\par }{\f3\insrsid5919392 \'b7\tab }{\f0\insrsid5919392 Cvswrappers supports \lquote !\rquote  to override default binary expansions.  List of known binary file types expanded.
\par }{\f3\insrsid5919392 \'b7\tab }{\f0\insrsid5919392 New expansion modes \endash kD for checking out files in DOS format, and \endash kM for checking out files in Mac format.
\par }{\f3\insrsid5919392 \'b7\tab }{\f0\insrsid5919392 New command options:  cvs passwd \endash p, cvs release \endash y.
\par }\pard \ql \fi-360\li720\ri0\nowidctlpar\tx720\faauto\rin0\lin720\itap0 {\f3\insrsid5919392 \'b7\tab }{\f0\insrsid5919392 New commands: rchacl, rlsacl, rchown.
\par }\pard\plain \s3\ql \li0\ri0\sb240\sa60\keepn\nowidctlpar\faauto\outlinelevel2\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\b\fs26\insrsid5919392 Important changes between stable release 2.0.58b and 2.0.58d
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\f0\insrsid5919392 
\par }\pard \ql \fi-360\li720\ri0\nowidctlpar\tx720\faauto\rin0\lin720\itap0 {\f3\insrsid5919392 \'b7\tab }{\f0\insrsid5919392 If a rename fails because AV has it open, keep retrying for up to 10 seconds.
\par }\pard\plain \s3\ql \li0\ri0\sb240\sa60\keepn\nowidctlpar\faauto\outlinelevel2\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\b\fs26\insrsid5919392 Important changes between stable release 2.0.58 and 2.0.58b
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\f0\insrsid5919392 
\par }\pard \ql \fi-360\li720\ri0\nowidctlpar\tx720\faauto\rin0\lin720\itap0 {\f3\insrsid5919392 \'b7\tab }{\f0\insrsid5919392 This version is validated against the eclipse 3.0.1 testsuite, and should work with no problems with that version.
\par }\pard \ql \fi-360\li720\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin720\itap0 {\f3\insrsid5919392 \'b7\tab }{\f0\insrsid5919392 The old \lquote Fake Unix CVS\rquote  option has been replaced by two sets of compatibility switches \endash 
 for legacy (non-CVSNT) clients, and CVSNT compatible clients.  For full eclipse compatibility enable all 3 options in the non-CVSNT section (the installer will do this for you if you previously had \lquote Fake Unix CVS\rquote  enabled).
\par }\pard\plain \s3\ql \li0\ri0\sb240\sa60\keepn\nowidctlpar\faauto\outlinelevel2\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\b\fs26\insrsid5919392 Important changes between stable release 2.0.51d and 2.0.58
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\f0\insrsid5919392 
\par }\pard \ql \fi-360\li720\ri0\nowidctlpar\tx720\faauto\rin0\lin720\itap0 {\f3\insrsid5919392 \'b7\tab }{\f0\insrsid5919392 The access control system has been completely rewritten, and supports many more options.  See the manual for more details.
\par }{\f3\insrsid5919392 \'b7\tab }{\f0\insrsid5919392 Rename functionality is now stable for files (rename directory is unsupported in this release).\~ We strongly recommend using 2.0.58 client as well as server if you are using this functionality.\~
 If you are using any 2.0.51 clients these may exhibit problems with "update" on renamed files \endash  in most cases this is solvable by repeating the update.
\par }{\f3\insrsid5919392 \'b7\tab }{\f0\insrsid5919392 Edit functionality is expanded and now supports exclusive edits plus the ability to specify bug numbers and comments.  New parameters are available to notification scripts to utilise these options.
\par }\pard \ql \fi-360\li720\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin720\itap0 {\f3\insrsid5919392 \'b7\tab }{\f0\insrsid5919392 Commits may be restricted to an individual bug.
\par }{\f3\insrsid5919392 \'b7\tab }{\f0\insrsid5919392 It is now possible to refer to entire commits as a single unit by using the new @< syntax and commit ids.  See the manual for more details.
\par }{\f3\insrsid5919392 \'b7\tab }{\f0\insrsid5919392 Expansion attributes are now fully versioned.  Attributes may be added and removed from existing files using new \endash k+ and \endash k- syntax.
\par }{\f3\insrsid5919392 \'b7\tab }{\f0\insrsid5919392 All locales supported by the local iconv library may be used as target codepages for the \endash k\{\} syntax.  The win32 version ships with a recent copy of GNU iconv.
\par }{\f3\insrsid5919392 \'b7\tab }{\f0\insrsid5919392 Filenames and comments can be automatically localised by the client allowing the use of umlauts and other characters and filenames, using the new \endash o global option.
\par }{\f3\insrsid5919392 \'b7\tab }{\f0\insrsid5919392 New scripting hooks precommand, premodule, postmodule, postcommand.
\par }{\f3\insrsid5919392 \'b7\tab }{\f0\insrsid5919392 Win32 server can be forced to run as an unprivileged user (duplicates functionality available in Unix builds since 2.0.51).
\par }{\f3\insrsid5919392 \'b7\tab }{\f0\insrsid5919392 Hooks for future case sensitivity module for Win32.
\par }{\f3\insrsid5919392 \'b7\tab }{\f0\insrsid5919392 Alias tags to create aliases for branch names.
\par }{\f3\insrsid5919392 \'b7\tab }{\f0\insrsid5919392 Unix builds can build as fully static version for systems that don\rquote t support shared libraries.
\par }{\f3\insrsid5919392 \'b7\tab }{\f0\insrsid5919392 Support for global watcher who receives notification of all edit/unedit/commit events.
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\f0\insrsid5919392 
\par }\pard\plain \s3\ql \li0\ri0\sb240\sa60\keepn\nowidctlpar\faauto\outlinelevel2\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\b\fs26\insrsid5919392 Important changes between stable release 2.0.51 and 2.0.51d
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\f0\insrsid5919392 
\par }\pard \ql \fi-360\li720\ri0\nowidctlpar\tx720\faauto\rin0\lin720\itap0 {\f3\insrsid5919392 \'b7\tab }{\f0\insrsid5919392 
Access control now uses cygwin ntea compatible settings by default rather than ntsec. If you are using cygwin and wish to continue using ntsec with CVSNT you will need to set this explicitly in your CYGWIN environment variable. 
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\f0\insrsid5919392 
\par }\pard\plain \s3\ql \li0\ri0\sb240\sa60\keepn\nowidctlpar\faauto\outlinelevel2\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\b\fs26\insrsid5919392 Important changes between stable release 2.0.41a and 2.0.51
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\f0\insrsid5919392 
\par }\pard \ql \fi-360\li720\ri0\nowidctlpar\tx720\faauto\rin0\lin720\itap0 {\f3\insrsid5919392 \'b7\tab }{\f0\insrsid5919392 
Repository prefixes are replaced by repository aliases (All your repositories should be upgraded automatically on installation to the new format). Aliases are much more versatile and allow you to house repositories on m
ultiple drives without having to lose the advantages that a prefix gave you. 
\par }\pard \ql \fi-360\li720\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin720\itap0 {\f3\insrsid5919392 \'b7\tab }{\f0\insrsid5919392 
File locking granularity is now exclusively per-file rather than per-directory. This helps user concurrency a many users may now be committing to the same directory simultaneously without holding each other up. 
\par }{\f3\insrsid5919392 \'b7\tab }{\f0\insrsid5919392 Local mode operations now start a local lockserver as a system tray app 
\par }{\f3\insrsid5919392 \'b7\tab }{\f0\insrsid5919392 External CVSNT protocol wrapper for 3rd party clients (extnt). 
\par }{\f3\insrsid5919392 \'b7\tab }{\f0\insrsid5919392 Pre-release of rename support (to be rolled out in the next version). This is
 disabled by default but users are encouraged to test it on non-critical systems (note: this changes the repository so please don't test on live/critical repositories yet). 
\par }{\f3\insrsid5919392 \'b7\tab }{\f0\insrsid5919392 Files or filetypes may be marked for automatic reserved edit (-kc option). 
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\f0\insrsid5919392 
\par }\pard\plain \s3\ql \li0\ri0\sb240\sa60\keepn\nowidctlpar\faauto\outlinelevel2\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\b\fs26\insrsid5919392 Important changes between stable release 2.0.41 and 2.0.41a
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\f0\insrsid5919392 
\par }\pard \ql \fi-360\li720\ri0\nowidctlpar\tx720\faauto\rin0\lin720\itap0 {\f3\insrsid5919392 \'b7\tab }{\f0\insrsid5919392 Special release to enable access to new sourceforge.net servers. 
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\f0\insrsid5919392 
\par }\pard\plain \s3\ql \li0\ri0\sb240\sa60\keepn\nowidctlpar\faauto\outlinelevel2\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\b\fs26\insrsid5919392 Important changes between stable release 2.0.34 and 2.0.41
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\f0\insrsid5919392 
\par }\pard \ql \fi-360\li720\ri0\nowidctlpar\tx720\faauto\rin0\lin720\itap0 {\f3\insrsid5919392 \'b7\tab }{\f0\insrsid5919392 An option is added to pretend to be a Unix CVS server. When used wi
th the repository prefix this improves compatibility with WSAD and Eclipse. 
\par }\pard \ql \fi-360\li720\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin720\itap0 {\f3\insrsid5919392 \'b7\tab }{\f0\insrsid5919392 
Extra unicode encodings are available. All combinations of UCS2/UTF16 with/without BOM are now catered for. See the mailing list archives or the documentation for the -k\{encoding\} options. 
\par }{\f3\insrsid5919392 \'b7\tab }{\f0\insrsid5919392 Security fix update 
\par }{\f3\insrsid5919392 \'b7\tab }{\f0\insrsid5919392 modules2 support added for more flexible modules, and paving the way for true rename in future releases. This is a test feature currently for those who are interested in the future development. 
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\f0\insrsid5919392 
\par }\pard\plain \s3\ql \li0\ri0\sb240\sa60\keepn\nowidctlpar\faauto\outlinelevel2\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\b\fs26\insrsid5919392 Important changes between stable release 2.0.26 and 2.0.34
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\f0\insrsid5919392 
\par }\pard \ql \fi-360\li720\ri0\nowidctlpar\tx720\faauto\rin0\lin720\itap0 {\f3\insrsid5919392 \'b7\tab }{\f0\insrsid5919392 LSA/Setuid layer is much more bulletproof and shouldn't cause problems any more 
\par }\pard \ql \fi-360\li720\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin720\itap0 {\f3\insrsid5919392 \'b7\tab }{\f0\insrsid5919392 Lockserver is much more scalable and won't use significant CPU under normal load 
\par }{\f3\insrsid5919392 \'b7\tab }{\f0\insrsid5919392 Some of the more complex mergpoint cases are now catered for 
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\f0\insrsid5919392 
\par }\pard\plain \s3\ql \li0\ri0\sb240\sa60\keepn\nowidctlpar\faauto\outlinelevel2\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\b\fs26\insrsid5919392 Important changes between stable release 2.0.14 and 2.0.26
\par }\pard\plain \ql \li0\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 \f1\fs24\lang2057\langfe2057\cgrid\langnp2057\langfenp2057 {\f0\insrsid5919392 
\par }\pard \ql \fi-360\li720\ri0\nowidctlpar\tx720\faauto\rin0\lin720\itap0 {\f3\insrsid5919392 \'b7\tab }{\f0\insrsid5919392 
ntserver protocol now no longer supported. The long depreciated ntserver protocol is now gone. sspi is a drop-in replacement with more features. 
\par }\pard \ql \fi-360\li720\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin720\itap0 {\f3\insrsid5919392 \'b7\tab }{\f0\insrsid5919392 Lockserver now default. All operations will now by default use the lockserver. There is no need to setup anything special to use this. 

\par }{\f3\insrsid5919392 \'b7\tab }{\f0\insrsid5919392 Connection over network shares needs special setup. Connection over network shares has long been depreciated. The use of lockser
ver as default means that this unsupported mode will no longer work without special handling. It is recommended to switch to a proper client/server model. If this is impossible then lockserver should be run on a machine and the correct LockServer=<machine
> line put in the CVSROOT/config. 
\par }{\f3\insrsid5919392 \'b7\tab }{\f0\insrsid5919392 No support will be given to configurations based on remote network shares. 
\par }{\f3\insrsid5919392 \'b7\tab }{\f0\insrsid5919392 It is possible to disable lockserver at this time but it is strongly discouraged and this option may not be supported in future. 
\par }{\f3\insrsid5919392 \'b7\tab }{\f0\insrsid5919392 NT4/Win95 
clients should use installation script. On NT4 and Win95 client installation can no longer be correctly achieved by simply copying the CVSNT files. The installer also installs the correct secur32.dll for the platform in the windows system directory. To av
oid error it is recommended to perform a proper client installation. 
\par }{\f3\insrsid5919392 \'b7\tab }{\f0\insrsid5919392 pserver impersonation is done properly. Instaead of the NTCreateToken hack (which doesn't work on Win2003 or XP SP2) pserver impersonation is done using a system level LSA helper. This 
works with the system and it properly audited etc. however as a new (but necessary) upgrade you may experience problems. The general advice is if you start to have problems with lsass.exe crashing, then uninstall the LSA helper DLL and forget about it. If
 you can isolate the program that is interfering, then post this information to the cvsnt list so that it can be investigated. A current list of problematic software is maintained in the Faq 
\par }\pard \ql \li0\ri0\nowidctlpar\faauto\rin0\lin0\itap0 {\f0\insrsid5919392 
\par }}